Add `sx` prop for theme-aware ad-hoc styles (#755)
primer/components: docs/content/overriding-styles.mdx

---
title: Overriding styles with the sx prop
---

Our goal with Primer Components is to hit the sweet spot between providing too little and too much styling flexibility; too little and the design system is too rigid, and too much and it becomes too difficult to maintain a consistent style. Our components already support a standard set of [system props](/system-props), but sometimes a component just isn't *quite* flexible enough to look the way you need it to look. For those cases, we provide the `sx` prop.

> The `sx` prop allows ad-hoc styling that is still theme aware. Declare the styles you want to apply in camel-cased object notation, and any values use appropriate theme values; for example, any `color` property values will use the values from the `colors` key in the theme.

Reviewer: This above section might be a little confusing to folks who aren't totally familiar with how pulling from the theme works. You could link to those docs: https://primer.style/components/primer-theme

I think this paragraph also makes it seem like you can _only_ pull from the theme for `sx` styles which isn't true. Maybe we can change the wording a bit to communicate that we'd like people to pull from the theme whenever possible? Something like this? (still needs some word smithing):

```suggestion
The `sx` prop allows ad-hoc styling that is still theme aware. Declare the styles you want to apply in camel-cased object notation and try to use theme values whenever possible for rule values. For more information about how theming works, reference the [theme docs](https://primer.style/components/primer-theme).
```

## Basic example

This example demonstrates applying a bottom border to `Heading`, a component that does not receive `BORDER` system props. The `borderBottomWidth` value comes from `theme.borderWidths` and `borderBottomColor` comes from `theme.colors`.

```jsx live
<Heading pb={2}>Heading</Heading>

<Heading
  pb={2}
  sx={{
    borderBottomWidth: 1,

>     borderBottomColor: 'border.gray',

Reviewer: Does the `sx` prop look up values in the theme in the same exact why that styled system does? Have we double checked that pulling from the theme works with 1) custom themes 2) when a user doesn't have a ThemeProvider at all (does it fall back to the default theme?)

We might want to add some documentation about the above two points. Something like "If you have a custom theme set up with a ThemeProvider, the custom theme will be honored". We might also want to point people to the styled-system docs for a refresher on how pulling from the theme works? (e.g. color related properties pull from the color object, spacing related properties pull from the space object, etc) This can be kind of confusing to some people. Maybe those docs should live in the theming docs or core concepts, and we just link to them from here.

Author: Yes, it works just like styled-system, and it seems to be used in some of styled-system's internals. Here's a quick test I did trying out a few of the theme forms:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/189606/80411987-fa511d00-8881-11ea-8f02-1e9193b9b20f.png)

I'll add a note to the docs.

    borderBottomStyle: 'solid'
  }}>
    Heading with bottom border
</Heading>
```

## Nesting, pseudo-classes, and pseudo-elements

The `sx` prop also allows for declaring styles based on media queries, psueudo-classes, and pseudo-elements. This example, though contrived, demonstrates the ability:

```jsx live
<Box sx={{
  '> *': {
    borderWidth: 1,
    borderColor: 'border.gray',
    borderStyle: 'solid',
    borderBottomWidth: 0,
    padding: 2,
    ':last-child': {
      borderBottomWidth: 1
    },
    ':hover': {
      bg: 'gray.1'
    }
  }
}}>
  <Box>First</Box>
  <Box>Second</Box>
  <Box>Third</Box>
</Box>
```

> ## When to use the `sx` prop

Reviewer: I would move this to just above ## Basic Example

    borderBottomStyle: 'solid'
  }}>
    Heading with bottom border
</Heading>
```

## Responsive values

Just like [values passed to system props](https://styled-system.com/responsive-styles), values in the `sx` prop can be provided as arrays to provide responsive styling.

```jsx live
<BorderBox
  p={2}
  sx={{
    bg: ['red.1', 'green.1', 'blue.1', 'purple.1', 'yellow.1']
  }}>
    Responsive background color
</BorderBox>
```

## Nesting, pseudo-classes, and pseudo-elements

The `sx` prop also allows for declaring styles based on media queries, psueudo-classes, and pseudo-elements. This example, though contrived, demonstrates the ability:

```jsx live
<Box sx={{
  '> *': {
    borderWidth: 1,
    borderColor: 'border.gray',
    borderStyle: 'solid',
    borderBottomWidth: 0,
    padding: 2,
    ':last-child': {
      borderBottomWidth: 1
    },
    ':hover': {
      bg: 'gray.1'
    }
  }
}}>
  <Box>First</Box>
  <Box>Second</Box>
  <Box>Third</Box>
</Box>
```

## When to use the `sx` prop

The `sx` prop clearly provides a lot of power, which means it is an easy tool to abuse. To best make use of it, we recommend following these guidelines:

> * Only use the `sx` prop for small stylistic changes to components. For more substantial changes, create your own wrapper using `styled-components`.

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason a component defined with `styled-components`...

```jsx
const MyBox = styled(Box)`
  background: ${get('colors.pink.2')}'
`
```

...is better than a component defined with the `sx` prop?

```jsx
function MyBox(props) {
  return <Box sx={{bg: 'pink.2'}} {...props} />
}
```

I agree that substantial style changes should probably be abstracted into a separate component but I'm curious what advantages the `styled` API provides.

Author: Given your two examples, I don't think there is an advantage. Given a large set of styles with pseudo-selectors and the like, I'd say an abstraction like `styled` is probably more readable.

I think my real goal with this bullet point was to suggest patterns that avoid overusing the `sx` prop and providing a huge object of overrides to the built-in components. I'm definitely open to thoughts about the point itself and also the wording tho.
